August 18, 2018

To say that music is important to me would be an understatement. Over the past 12 or so years, I've spent a lot of time finding new music on YouTube. I was never a fan of finding an artist and immediately downloading an entire album or adding it to a playlist. Instead, I hand pick each and every song- though I'll admit that there are some repeats because I rediscovered a song months or years later. During the summer of 2018, my YouTube playlist that I've continually added to since high school hit YouTube's maximum capacity for a playlist, which is 5,000 songs. I quickly did the math only to discover that, on average, I had found at least one new song per day for the past 12 years. I took to downloading these songs so that I would never lose my playlist, especially seeing as songs are sometimes removed due to DMCA claims. I used the youtube-dl package on Ubuntu to download everything from this playlist and assigned title and artist meta data so that I could easily arrange and call each file within my music player of choice.
A number of weeks later (read: last month) and after months of internal discussion, I have decided to transition out of graduate school and into a data role in industry. Because a background in chemistry doesn't give me all of the necessary skills to make this leap into data science, let alone demonstrate my ability to do just that, I figured I should tangibly expand my skill set by making a project of my own to teach myself a variety of tools while also answering some cool questions about my music taste over the years.
So, the intent of this project is to analyze my music over the years. The types of analyses will certainly depent on what forms of data I am able to extract. My current lines of thinking are: 
1. What forms of meta data am I able to pull directly from YouTube given my playlist? Do all songs have assigned tags, e.g., #genre?
2. How can I go about analyzing waveforms of the files to analyze the music that way? Do I instead need .wav files as opposed to the .mp3 files that I currently have?
